[DOCS] Adds 8.5.0 release notes (#143134)
elastic/kibana: docs/CHANGELOG.asciidoc

Review important information about the {kib} 8.5.0 release.

* <<release-notes-8.5.0>>
//* <<release-notes-8.4.3>>
//* <<release-notes-8.4.2>>
//* <<release-notes-8.4.1>>
//* <<release-notes-8.4.0>>
//* <<release-notes-8.3.3>>
//* <<release-notes-8.3.2>>
//* <<release-notes-8.3.1>>
//* <<release-notes-8.3.0>>
//* <<release-notes-8.2.3>>
//* <<release-notes-8.2.2>>
//* <<release-notes-8.2.1>>
//* <<release-notes-8.2.0>>
//* <<release-notes-8.1.3>>
//* <<release-notes-8.1.2>>
//* <<release-notes-8.1.1>>
//* <<release-notes-8.1.0>>
//* <<release-notes-8.0.1>>
//* <<release-notes-8.0.0>>
//* <<release-notes-8.0.0-rc2>>
//* <<release-notes-8.0.0-rc1>>
//* <<release-notes-8.0.0-beta1>>
//* <<release-notes-8.0.0-alpha2>>
//* <<release-notes-8.0.0-alpha1>>

--
[[release-notes-8.5.0]]
== {kib} 8.5.0

coming::[8.5.0]

Review the following information about the {kib} 8.5.0 release.

[float]
[[breaking-changes-8.5.0]]
=== Breaking changes

Breaking changes can prevent your application from optimal operation and performance.
Before you upgrade to 8.5.0, review the breaking changes, then mitigate the impact to your application.

// tag::notable-breaking-changes[]
[discrete]
[[breaking-141757]]

> .Updates bulk action API to return actionId instead of agents success for consistency

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Updates bulk action API to return actionId instead of agent success
```

Reviewer: I don't think we need to explain the reason. It makes this title grammatically awkward.

*Impact* +
When you use `FleetBulkResponse`, you now receive only `actionId` responses. 
====
      
[discrete]
[[breaking-139431]]
.Removes filter validation for ad-hoc data views
[%collapsible]
====
*Details* +
Filters associated with unknown data views, such as deleted data views, are no longer automatically disabled. For more information, refer to {kibana-pull}139431[#139431].

*Impact* +
Filters associated with unknown data views now display a warning message instead of being automatically disabled.
====
      
[discrete]
[[breaking-138677]]
.Removes the `package_policies` field from the agent policy saved object
[%collapsible]
====
*Details* +
The bi directionnal foreign key between agent policy and package policy has been removed. For more information, refer to {kibana-pull}138677[#138677].

*Impact* +
The agent policy saved object no longer includes the `package_policies` field.
====
// end::notable-breaking-changes[]
      
[float]
[[features-8.5.0]]
=== Features
{kib} 8.5.0 adds the following new and notable features.

Alerting::

> * 137988 browser fields UI {kibana-pull}140516[#140516]

Reviewer 2: @XavierM can confirm, but this should probably be something like: 

```suggestion
* Adds dynamic field selection to the alerts table {kibana-pull}140516[#140516]
```

* Show alerts count {kibana-pull}140473[#140473]
* Adds the ability to allows users to assign other users to cases {kibana-pull}140208[#140208]
* Ability run a rule on-demand {kibana-pull}139848[#139848]
* Ability to bulk update API keys for alerting rules {kibana-pull}139036[#139036]
* Index threshold alert can't use unsigned long data type {kibana-pull}138452[#138452]
* Category fields endpoint {kibana-pull}138245[#138245]
* Index threshold alert UI does not fill index picker with data streams {kibana-pull}137584[#137584]

APM::

> * Support Input Packages {kibana-pull}140035[#140035]

Reviewer 3: This should be under Fleet. 

```diff
- Support Input Packages {kibana-pull}140035[#140035]
+ Adds support for input only packages {kibana-pull}140035[#140035]
```

> * Display kubernetes metadata in service icons popup and instance accordion {kibana-pull}139612[#139612]

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Adds Kubernetes metadata to service icons and instance accordion {kibana-pull}139612[#139612]
```

* AWS lambda metrics api {kibana-pull}139041[#139041]

Discover::
* Adds support for storing time with saved searches {kibana-pull}138377[#138377]
* Enables tags for saved searches {kibana-pull}136162[#136162]

Elastic Security::
For the Elastic Security 8.5.0 release information, refer to {security-guide}/release-notes.html[_Elastic Security Solution Release Notes_].

> Fleet::

Reviewer: There is not enough detail in these descriptions to help users. I've provided some descriptions based on what I found in the PRs, but it would be better if the dev team could write user-friendly entries.

@jen-huang Please confirm these descriptions.

> * Agent activity {kibana-pull}140510[#140510]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Adds agent activity flyout {kibana-pull}140510[#140510]
```

> * Config options added to policy {kibana-pull}139421[#139421]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Adds a new event toggle to capture terminal output in endpoint {kibana-pull}139421[#139421]
```

> * Moving action batching to async {kibana-pull}138870[#138870]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Makes batch actions asynchronous {kibana-pull}138870[#138870]
```

> * Tagging of integration assets {kibana-pull}137184[#137184]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Adds ability to tag integration assets {kibana-pull}137184[#137184]
```

Infrastructure::
Inital hosts page {kibana-pull}138173[#138173]

Lens & Visualizations::

> Adds the ability to duplicate layers in *Lens* {kibana-pull}140603[#140603]

Reviewer 4: @ninoslavmiskovic @ghudgins should we mention query based annotations and/or ad-hoc data views here?

Machine Learning::
* Notifications page {kibana-pull}140613[#140613]
* Explain Log Rate Spikes: Add option to view grouped analysis results {kibana-pull}140464[#140464]
* Stubs out UI for the ML Inference Pipeline panel {kibana-pull}140456[#140456]
* Attach the anomaly charts embeddable to Case {kibana-pull}139628[#139628]
* Log pattern analysis UI {kibana-pull}139005[#139005]
* Attach the anomaly swim lane embeddable to Case {kibana-pull}138994[#138994]

Management::

> * Updates the AggConfig for nested sibling pipeline aggs {kibana-pull}140650[#140650]

Reviewer 2: This might make more sense under the visualizations section cc @ppisljar

Author: I moved this under Lens & visualizations, but if you want me to move it somewhere else, just let me know. 

cc: @ppisljar

Observability::
Feat(slo): Create basic SLO route {kibana-pull}139490[#139490]

Osquery::
Adds Osquery results to Case {kibana-pull}139909[#139909]

Security::
Adds the ability to set a default Access Agreement for all `xpack.security`-level authentication providers {kibana-pull}139217[#139217]

For more information about the features introduced in 8.5.0, refer to <<whats-new,What's new in 8.5>>.

[[enhancements-and-bug-fixes-v8.5.0]]
=== Enhancements and bug fixes

For detailed information about the 8.5.0 release, review the enhancements and bug fixes.

[float]
[[enhancement-v8.5.0]]
=== Enhancements
Alerting::
* 141189 alerts table performance {kibana-pull}141385[#141385]
* 141119 remove visibility toogle + use_columns refactor {kibana-pull}141250[#141250]
* Adds Stats on top of execution logs {kibana-pull}140883[#140883]
* Adds the Logs tab to Rules and Connectors UI {kibana-pull}138852[#138852]
* Adds "exclude previous hits" check box to ESQuery rule form {kibana-pull}138781[#138781]
* The ES Query Rule Type now supports Runtime Mappings and the Fields parameters when using an Elasticsearch DSL query {kibana-pull}138427[#138427]

APM::

> * Service metrics on inventory page {kibana-pull}140868[#140868]
> * Sort trace samples {kibana-pull}140589[#140589]
> * Setting for tail sampling storage limit in Fleet integration {kibana-pull}140567[#140567]
> * Adds AWS Lambda metrics to "Metrics" tab UI {kibana-pull}140550[#140550]
> * Adds Experimental Mode for APM UI {kibana-pull}139553[#139553]
> * Rename JVMs to Metrics {kibana-pull}138437[#138437]
> * Display partial data buckets differently and message in the chart tooltips {kibana-pull}137533[#137533]

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Adds option to power APM inventory with service metrics {kibana-pull}140868[#140868]
* Adds a sort order to the trace samples on the transaction details page {kibana-pull}140589[#140589]
* Adds a tail-based sampling storage limit (APM integration) {kibana-pull}140567[#140567]
* Adds AWS Lambda metrics to the "Metrics" tab {kibana-pull}140550[#140550]
* Adds an experimental mode to the APM app {kibana-pull}139553[#139553]
* Renames JVMs to Metrics {kibana-pull}138437[#138437]
* Changes how partial data buckets are displayed {kibana-pull}137533[#137533]
```

Dashboard::
Adds the ability to view panel-level filters and queries {kibana-pull}136655[#136655]

Discover::

> * Adds the ability to only show reset height button when current height is not the default {kibana-pull}143013[#143013]
> * Adds the ability to persist histogram height to local storage {kibana-pull}140997[#140997]

Reviewer 5: I'd suggest to remove them, since those are fixes to #139446, so those bugs didn't escape into the wilderness FYI @davismcphee 
```suggestion
```

* Updates the layout for unified histogram {kibana-pull}139446[#139446]
* Adds new field stats in sidebar popover {kibana-pull}139072[#139072]
* Adds ad-hoc data views {kibana-pull}138283[#138283]
* Updates the formatter for aggregate_metric_double field values {kibana-pull}138205[#138205]

Elastic Security::
For the Elastic Security 8.5.0 release information, refer to {security-guide}/release-notes.html[_Elastic Security Solution Release Notes_].

Fleet::
* Adds toggle for experimental synthetic `_source` support in Fleet data streams {kibana-pull}140132[#140132]
* Enhances the package policy API to create or update a package policy API with a simplified way to define inputs {kibana-pull}139420[#139420]
* Support new subscription and license fields {kibana-pull}137799[#137799]

Infrastructure::
* Adds log-* index pattern support on SM UI {kibana-pull}139121[#139121]
* Adds health API support for data ingested from package {kibana-pull}138964[#138964]
* Adds support for integration package {kibana-pull}138224[#138224]
* Adds the inital hosts page {kibana-pull}138173[#138173]

Lens & Visualizations::

> * Adds support for noPadding option to Lens embeddable {kibana-pull}140442[#140442]

Reviewer 4: Can be removed, this is an internal thing - I adjusted the label on the PR already.

* Adds the Collapse by option for partition charts in *Lens* {kibana-pull}140336[#140336]
* Adds the ability to show the metric name if there are multiple layers with breakdowns in *Lens* {kibana-pull}140314[#140314]
* Adds time scaling without date histogram in *Lens* {kibana-pull}140107[#140107]
* Improves the field drag defaults in *Lens* {kibana-pull}140050[#140050]
* Adds the time marker setting for time axis in *Lens* {kibana-pull}139950[#139950]
* Adds the ability to make sure shard size stays stable for low number of sizes in *TSVB*, *Lens*, and Agg based visualizations {kibana-pull}139791[#139791]
* Adds the one click filter to the *Lens* table {kibana-pull}139701[#139701]
* Improves the metric palette behavior in *Lens* {kibana-pull}139596[#139596]

> * Moves field existence from *Lens* to UnifiedFieldList plugin in *Lens* {kibana-pull}139453[#139453]

Reviewer 4: Can be removed as well

* Explain Log Rate Spikes: Adds discover link to analysis table {kibana-pull}139877[#139877]
* Adding ecs_compatibility setting for find structure calls {kibana-pull}139708[#139708]
* Improves messaging when an anomaly detection forecast errors {kibana-pull}139345[#139345]
* Anomaly Detection: adds maps link when source data contains geo fields {kibana-pull}139333[#139333]
* Quickly create ML jobs from lens visualizations {kibana-pull}136421[#136421]

Management::
* Url drilldown `date` helper now allows rounding up relative dates {kibana-pull}137874[#137874]
* In CSV reports, an error message now appears on the job when fewer CSV rows are generated than expected {kibana-pull}137800[#137800]

Maps::
* Adds support for adhoc data views {kibana-pull}140858[#140858]
* Timeslider control {kibana-pull}139228[#139228]
* Support Vector tile runtime geo_point fields {kibana-pull}139047[#139047]
* Show data view name in UI {kibana-pull}138928[#138928]
* Adds ability to disable tooltips for layer {kibana-pull}138275[#138275]
* Cancel button when editing by value from dashboard {kibana-pull}137880[#137880]

Security::

> Audit events for user_login can be missing when using PKI or Kerberos {kibana-pull}139492[#139492]

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Adds audit events to "login-less" authentication flows (e.g. PKI, Kerberos) {kibana-pull}139492[#139492]
```

[float]
[[fixes-v8.5.0]]
=== Bug fixes
Alerting::
* Render the grid only if we have alerts {kibana-pull}142481[#142481]
* Alerts Table browser field - fix siem browser fields call {kibana-pull}141431[#141431]
* Adds getActionsHealth method to return permanent encryption key existence {kibana-pull}140535[#140535]
* Clarify rule notification values {kibana-pull}140457[#140457]
* Actions are not able to configure a max number of attempts {kibana-pull}138845[#138845]
* Elasticsearch Query Rule doesn't have 'dark mode' view for query {kibana-pull}138631[#138631]
* Getting error about secrets not being saved when import a SO (Connector Saved Object) {kibana-pull}138019[#138019]
* Provide indication of how many rules are using connector on Connector List view {kibana-pull}137181[#137181]

APM::
* Remove check for infra data {kibana-pull}142835[#142835]
* Prefer span metrics over span events {kibana-pull}141519[#141519]
* Fixes search bar suggestions {kibana-pull}141101[#141101]
* Sort trace samples {kibana-pull}140589[#140589]

Dashboard::
Fixes pinned filters that backed up in Session Storage {kibana-pull}142262[#142262]

Discover::

> * Fixes an issue where histogram does not fill its container when time interval is not auto {kibana-pull}143004[#143004]

Reviewer 5: Can be removed because it fixes a bug that didn't escape into the wilderness
```suggestion
```

Reviewer 5: it seems it was resolved but still `Fixes an issue where histogram does not fill its container when time interval is not auto {kibana-pull}143004[#143004]` is here, but it can be remove

> * Fixes query bar autocomplete {kibana-pull}140963[#140963]

Reviewer 5: This isn't a Discover fix, it's in Graph

* Adds support for line breaks in Document explorer {kibana-pull}139449[#139449]
* Cancelled request errors for embeddables are now hidden {kibana-pull}137690[#137690]
* Fixes legacy sort saved search stored in Dashboard saved objects {kibana-pull}137488[#137488]
* Fixes column width handling {kibana-pull}137445[#137445]

Elastic Security::
For the Elastic Security 8.5.0 release information, refer to {security-guide}/release-notes.html[_Elastic Security Solution Release Notes_].

Enterprise Search::
For the Elastic Enterprise Search 8.5.0 release information, refer to {enterprise-search-ref}/changelog.html[_Elastic Enterprise Search Documentation Release notes_].

Fleet::

> * Bugfix: Refresh search results when clearing category filter {kibana-pull}142853[#142853]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Refresh search results when clearing category filter {kibana-pull}142853[#142853]
```

* Respect `default_field: false` when generating index settings {kibana-pull}142277[#142277]
* Fixes repeated debug logs when bundled package directory does not exist {kibana-pull}141660[#141660]

Infrastructure::
* Adds support for Logstash datastream in standalone query {kibana-pull}138689[#138689]

Lens & Visualizations::
* Fixes the detailed tooltip wrap problem {kibana-pull}142818[#142818]

> * Fixes and issue where columns normalized by unit were unable to display properly on Dashboards for *Lens* metric visualizations {kibana-pull}142741[#142741]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Fixes an issue where columns normalized by unit were unable to display properly on Dashboards for *Lens* metric visualizations {kibana-pull}142741[#142741]
```

* Adds back ticks on bands in *Lens* {kibana-pull}142702[#142702]
* Fixes guidance panel appearing for a moment when saving Graph {kibana-pull}141228[#141228]
* Fixes pie filter without slice {kibana-pull}141227[#141227]

> * Fixes and issue where using annotations from different data views than the visualizations created panel breaks in *TSVB* {kibana-pull}141104[#141104]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Fixes an issue where using annotations from different data views than the visualizations created panel breaks in *TSVB* {kibana-pull}141104[#141104]
```

[[breaking-changes-8.4.2]]
=== Breaking change

Breaking changes can prevent your application from optimal operation and performance.
Before you upgrade, review the breaking change, then mitigate the impact to your application.

There are no breaking changes in {kib} 8.4.2.

To review the breaking changes in previous versions, refer to the following:

{kibana-ref-all}/8.3/release-notes-8.3.0.html#breaking-changes-8.3.0[8.3.0] | {kibana-ref-all}/8.2/release-notes-8.2.0.html#breaking-changes-8.2.0[8.2.0] | {kibana-ref-all}/8.1/release-notes-8.1.0.html#breaking-changes-8.1.0[8.1.0] | {kibana-ref-all}/8.0/release-notes-8.0.0.html#breaking-changes-8.0.0[8.0.0] | {kibana-ref-all}/8.0/release-notes-8.0.0-rc2.html#breaking-changes-8.0.0-rc2[8.0.0-rc2] | {kibana-ref-all}/8.0/release-notes-8.0.0-rc1.html#breaking-changes-8.0.0-rc1[8.0.0-rc1] | {kibana-ref-all}/8.0/release-notes-8.0.0-beta1.html#breaking-changes-8.0.0-beta1[8.0.0-beta1] | {kibana-ref-all}/8.0/release-notes-8.0.0-alpha2.html#breaking-changes-8.0.0-alpha2[8.0.0-alpha2] | {kibana-ref-all}/8.0/release-notes-8.0.0-alpha1.html#breaking-changes-8.0.0-alpha1[8.0.0-alpha1]

[float]
[[enhancement-v8.4.2]]
=== Enhancements
Security::

> Logs a hash of the Saved Objects encryption key (`xpack.encryptedSavedObjects.encryptionKey`) when {kib} starts to make it easier to spot mismatched encryption keys {kibana-pull}139874[#139874]

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Logs a hash of the saved objects encryption key (`xpack.encryptedSavedObjects.encryptionKey`) when {kib} starts to assist in identifying mismatched encryption keys {kibana-pull}139874[#139874]
```

* Static Java agent version list becomes stale quickly {kibana-pull}131759[#131759]
* Adds recovery context to Log Threshold rule {kibana-pull}131279[#131279]
* Adds recovery context to the Metric Threshold rule {kibana-pull}131264[#131264]
* Adds context variables to recovery alerts for Inventory Threshold rule {kibana-pull}131199[#131199]
* Copy alert state to alert context and implement alert recovery {kibana-pull}128693[#128693]
* Progressive fetching (experimental) {kibana-pull}127598[#127598]
* Replace environment dropdown with SuggestionsSelect in landing pages and service overview page {kibana-pull}126679[#126679]
* Store Logs UI settings in a dedicated `infrastructure-monitoring-log-view` saved object {kibana-pull}125014[#125014]

Platform::
* The saved objects management table has a new "Last updated" column to easily access recently modified saved objects {kibana-pull}132525[#132525]
* Sync panels tooltips on dashboard level {kibana-pull}130449[#130449]

Querying & Filtering::
* Support fields custom label on filter editor {kibana-pull}130533[#130533]
* Allows comma delimiter on the filters multiple selections dropdowns {kibana-pull}130266[#130266]

Security::

> * Disallow creating a role with the existing name in the role management page. Introduce a new optional boolean `createOnly` parameter in the create role API to prevent overwriting existing roles {kibana-pull}132218[#132218]

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* Disallows creating a role with an existing name in the role management page. Introduces an optional boolean `createOnly` parameter in the create role API to prevent overwriting existing roles; the default value is false, preserving the original API behavior {kibana-pull}132218[#132218]
```
